Okay, sir, we're on again.
How often, to be irrelevant for a moment, how often do you encounter a person you're interviewing who also has his own recorder, of what he's saying?
Not often.
Do you have one?
No, I don't.
No, that's good.
I never have, but I have noticed—well, I'll tell you, my colleague at Harvard Law School, Alan Dershowitz, apparently, whenever he speaks, carries his own
I can't blame him, actually.
No, no, I didn't mean to.
If he's been burned in the past.
I don't know whether he has been burned, or sometimes, of course, he's preserving things that wouldn't otherwise be recorded.
And it may, I suspect.
I have often wished that I could reconstruct the way I put something
in class, or to you, or, gee, I said that much better this morning, and it never will come back, you know what I mean?
That, I suspect, that's all he's doing, but it just flashed through my mind.
Well, in my experience, it's happened one or two times, particularly, I think, with people involved to some degree in the political process, where it would behoove them to have a record of what they said
Right.
And it would make sense.
But in terms of interviewing authors, per se, none of them have ever done it.
Right.
Question.
I know that you have gone on record as saying you will not go on record regarding the Bork nomination.
Right.
Could you tell me, for the record, why would you give me a statement?
Yes.
an application of the principle that one shouldn't involve himself, where there may be a conflict between irrelevant personal feelings in this interest and the exercise of the impartial judgment
Not even I can tell for sure, having been fired by Bork in the sense that he was the instrument, how far any personal feeling
might be influencing my judgment.
If it was against him, how far it was being influenced in that direction.
If it was foreign, how far it was the result of leaning over backwards and not wanting to be unfair.
And I don't think any man can be sure that he has struck the right balance.
And I think every man also
be aware that even if by some miracle he did strike the right balance, nobody else would think he had struck the right balance.
So, better to withdraw from the debate entirely?
Yes, it's—I mean, the clearer cases, of course, are where one should stand aside from acting on a public question.
But I think much the same thing is involved when it comes to expressing an opinion which might have some influence, and might have some influence for the very reason that you shouldn't be expressing an opinion.
Perhaps you might wish to comment on the process, though, that he is currently going through, whereby he is acknowledged to have excellent credentials
and yet there is a groundswell of opposition to his confirmation.
Well, that's, again, a fair question, but any comment on the process gets so close to the particular case and the person and the individual that I think I'm better now.
Okay.
Another topical question.
How do you feel about the propriety of Justice Thurgood Marshall just a few days ago?
commenting on the politics of President Reagan?
I think all the justices would be much better advised if they would return to the older practice, virtually a tradition, of refraining from comment on current public issues or current public officials or
perhaps more broadly, current public figures.
Maybe there have been exceptions in the period from the Civil War to 1960 or thereabouts.
I don't know of them.
The practice certainly came to be in true
All but the last few years of my life, the justices didn't do that, period.
You mentioned Justice Marshall.
There's also Justice Stevens' comment on the board, nomination.
I think the justices would do better to define their talking to their judicial opinion.
Regarding the Constitution itself, this document, which evolved apparently over a four-month period, of course the evolution wasn't greater than that, but the actual framing, you might just reflect on the inspiration.
Was it an inspired process to have such...
that two centuries' worth of significance.
Well, it was the product of years of study and reflection of men who were both practical
the affairs of their day, had local office and things like that, but who also had read nearly everything written about government and governments in the past and studied their history.
And I think the single most extraordinary thing about the dominant framers of the
was their sense of the long-run implications of the way you establish institutions of government through the interplay between those institutions and human behavior, the springs of human action.
I mean, they thought in these terms and talked in these terms.
They were concerned for the long run.
But they also were very conscious of the immediate political needs of their times.
Now, the other thing that, of course, in a sense, perhaps comes closer to inspiration, in the end, as you know, during those four months, it teetered on the balance.
Early July, they just about all went home.
almost like the collective bargaining session.
Well, we'll meet again tonight.
It doesn't look to be much use.
If it doesn't come off tonight, then we'll break up.
I think the sense we must achieve a result, we must achieve some unity, was inspiration almost.
Do you think that these 18th century men
would be amazed to learn that their 18th century sensibilities still govern people in the 20th century.
I think you kind of touch on that in the book, where you say they probably had no idea that the Constitution, as framed, would continue to be a viable product 200 years later.
I think that's true.
Of course, we know
Some men of that time, he wasn't in the convention, but Jefferson said on various occasions that the Constitution ought to be changed every ten years.
I certainly didn't think it was as enduring.
No, one of the things that in the bicentennial year my mind keeps coming back to, you'll remember that George Washington wrote Lafayette shortly after the signing
of the Constitution.
It was a miracle.
I think it's an even greater miracle, that with few major changes through the addition of the Bill of Rights.
But that was done by the same men, essentially.
Several years later.
Yes, four years later, and not identical men.
But Madison was on both, and so were a lot of others.
And then, the post-Civil War amendments.
With those major additions, it's the same document, the same instrument.
And isn't it an even greater miracle that that same instrument, with those changes, still is such a workable structure of government today.
That serves as a low stock.
for Americans in so many contexts.
You ask, why that second miracle?
Well, I think part of it was what I call this sense of the framers, the interplay between institutions and human nature in the long run, which second
I attribute a great deal of it to the work of the Supreme Court.
It occurred to me that somebody might say, well, isn't it curious, Professor, that you should attribute so much to the role of court, which isn't even spelled out in the Constitution?
And then the third is, I think, the character of the American people.
The extraordinary sense, through most of our history, of being engaged in a great common adventure.
The sense of motion, an adventure not just of
all the people, excluding the blacks at first, but now bringing them into it.
But also a sense of an adventure that was common to previous generations and future generations.
You have a wonderful line in the book.
They also had a sense of giving us enough, but not too much.
Yes, yes.
Saying enough, but not too much.
Yes, very important.
Yes.
And then one other thing which I really like is that
You said that it's amazing how the most trivial cases can decide the most fundamental issues.
Yes, yes.
Has that always surprised you as a student of the law?
Well, certainly often.
Certainly often, and about Marbury and Madison, yes, for many years.
I did do.
connection with the book that projected television series, I did get deeper into the facts that people made for these cases and the events that led up to them that I ever had before.
They're wonderful cases, by the way.
I found that fascinating.
I've practiced law enough.
Now, cases do arise out of very individual human needs.
They become important because there are a lot of other human beings who have the same feelings.
And or, as John W. Davis used to put it, appellate cases are one on the facts and not on the law.
I was not unaware of this, but I found it great fun pursuing it, and it intensified my appreciation of those truths.
Well, we've got this schedule.
I'd be delighted to talk more.
Would you kindly give me the honors?